vhost-device-console: Add initial implementation (#601)
rust-vmm/vhost-device: staging/vhost-device-console/README.md

# vhost-device-console - Console emulation backend daemon

## Description

This program is a vhost-user backend that emulates a VirtIO Console device.
The device's binary takes as parameter a socket, a socket number which is the
number of connections, commonly used across all vhost-devices to communicate
with the vhost-user frontend devices, and the backend type "nested" or
"network".

By using the "nested" backend, vhost-device-console, as soon as, the guest
is booted, will print the login prompt into the same terminal and gives
the ability to insert characters or certain keys as in a regular
terminal.

By using the "network" backend, vhost-device-console, as soon as the guest
is booted, creates a local server in the given localhost port, and gives
the chance to connect (via a TCP connection) and interact with it.

This program is tested with QEMU's `vhost-user-device-pci` device.
Examples' section below.

> 

Reviewer: In case of CAN, for example, I think we can say that we are waiting for the spec and for the driver to be accepted upstream.

> 

Reviewer 2: @TimosAmpel can you add a section in this README to explain why this device is in staging? I'd describe the missing steps, something like this (not sure if they apply in this case, it's just an example):
```markdown
## Staging Device
This device will be in `staging` until we complete the following steps:
- [ ] merge Linux's driver upstream
- [ ] merge virtio-spec changes upstream
- [ ] ...
```

## Synopsis
```text
vhost-device-console --socket-path=<SOCKET_PATH>
```

## Options

.. program:: vhost-device-console

.. option:: -h, --help

  Print help.

.. option:: -s, --socket-path=PATH

  Location of vhost-user Unix domain sockets, this path will be suffixed with
  0,1,2..socket_count-1.

.. option:: -p, --tcp-port=PORT_NUMBER

 The localhost's port to be used for each guest, this part will be increased with
 0,1,2..socket_count-1.

-- option:: -b, --backend=network|nested

>   The backend type vhost-device-console will use.

Author: I just saw that both "nested" and "network" are described into the first section in the README file.
Also as you suggested, I have put "nested" as the default backend.

  Note: The nested backend can be used only when socket_count equals 1.

## Limitations

This device is still work-in-progress (WIP). The current version has been tested
with VIRTIO_CONSOLE_F_MULTIPORT, but only for one console.

## Features

The current device gives access to multiple QEMU guest by providing a login prompt
either by connecting to a localhost server port (network backend) or by creating an
nested command prompt in the current terminal (nested backend). This prompt appears
as soon as the guest is fully booted and gives the ability to user run command as a
in regular terminal.

## Examples

### Dependencies
For testing the device the required dependencies are:
- Linux:
    - Set `CONFIG_VIRTIO_CONSOLE=y`
- QEMU (optional):
    - A new vhost-user-console device has been implemented in the following repo:
      - https://github.com/virtualopensystems/qemu/tree/vhu-console-rfc

### Test the device

The daemon should be started first:
```shell

> host# vhost-device-console --socket-path=console.sock --socket-count=1 \

Author: Thanks! That's corrected

                           --tcp-port=12345 --backend=network
```
>Note: In case the backend is "nested" there is no need to provide
       "--socket-count" and "--tcp-port" parameters.

The QEMU invocation needs to create a chardev socket the device can
use to communicate as well as share the guests memory over a memfd.

There are two option for running QEMU with vhost-device-console:

1) Using `vhost-user-console-pci`:
```text
host# qemu-system                                          \
    -m 4096                                                \
    -numa node,memdev=mem                                  \
    -object memory-backend-memfd,id=mem,size=4G,share=on   \

>     -chardev socket,path=/tmp/console.sock,id=con          \

Author: Thanks! Indeed that was a mistake, I have just updated it

    -device vhost-user-console-pci,chardev=con0,id=console \
    ...
```

> Note: For testing this scenario the reader needs to clone the QEMU version from the following repo
>       which implements `vhost-user-console` device.
> - https://github.com/virtualopensystems/qemu/tree/vhu-console-rfc

2) Using `vhost-user-device-pci`:
```text
host# qemu-system                                                                   \
    -m 4096                                                                         \

>     -numa node,memdev=mem                                                           \

Author: thanks! I just followed vsock example, hope that works!

# vhost-device-console - Console emulation backend daemon

## Description

This program is a vhost-user backend that emulates a VirtIO Console device.
The device's binary takes as parameter a socket, a socket number which is the
number of connections, commonly used across all vhost-devices to communicate
with the vhost-user frontend devices, and the backend type "nested" or
"network".

By using the "nested" backend, vhost-device-console, as soon as, the guest
is booted, will print the login prompt into the same terminal and gives
the ability to insert characters or certain keys as in a regular
terminal.

By using "network" backend, vhost-device-console, as soon as the guests

> is booted, creates a local server in the given localhost port, and gives

Reviewer 2: Which kind of connection? tcp?

Author: Yes that's a TCP connection. The device has a TCPlisener when started with `network` option, and waits for a TCP connection.
I describe that later in the README file but I have also added a clarification where you pointed out.

the chance to connect on them and interact with the guests.

This program is tested with QEMU's `vhost-user-device-pci` device.
Examples' section below.

> This program is a vhost-user backend that emulates a VirtIO Console device.

Reviewer 2: Duplicated line?

Author: Yes indeed, I have deleted it!

# vhost-device-console - Console emulation backend daemon

## Description

This program is a vhost-user backend that emulates a VirtIO Console device.
The device's binary takes as parameter a socket, a socket number which is the
number of connections, commonly used across all vhost-devices to communicate
with the vhost-user frontend devices, and the backend type "nested" or
"network".

> By using the "nested" backend, vhost-device-console, as soon as, the guest

Reviewer: This is a minor comment. How about rewrite it as:
```suggestion
The nested backend allows input/output to the guest console through the current terminal.
```

Author: Fully agree, nice touch! I just needed to adjuct it a bit for the other backend.

    -machine <machine options>,memory-backend=mem0              \
    -object memory-backend-memfd,id=mem0,size=<Guest RAM size>  \ # size == -m size
    -chardev socket,path=/tmp/console.sock0,id=con              \
    -device vhost-user-console-pci,chardev=con0,id=console      \
    ...
```

> Note: For testing this scenario the reader needs to clone the QEMU version from the following repo
>       which implements `vhost-user-console` device.
> - https://github.com/virtualopensystems/qemu/tree/vhu-console-rfc

2) Using `vhost-user-device-pci`:
```text
host# qemu-system                                                                   \
    <normal QEMU options>                                                           \
    -machine <machine options>,memory-backend=mem0                                  \
    -object memory-backend-memfd,id=mem0,size=<Guest RAM size>                      \ # size == -m size
    -chardev socket,id=con0,path=/tmp/console.sock0                                 \
    -device vhost-user-device-pci,chardev=con0,virtio-id=3,num_vqs=4,config_size=12 \
    ...
```

Eventually, the user can connect to the console by running:
```test

> host# stty raw && nc 127.0.0.1 12345

Reviewer: I tested using this cmd line and I observed the following behavior:
```
root@syzkaller:~# llss^M
Connecting  Streaming    file.wav   nada.wav   rec.wav  test.wav
Paused      Unconnected  file2.wav  queen.wav  test.sh
root@syzkaller:~# 
```
Keys are displayed two times. Maybe my configuration is wrong. The command is correctly executed so guest is not getting the key two times.

Author: Ouch.. my bad. I have finally got it working with `stty -icanon -echo && nc localhost 12345 && stty echo` and also updated the README accordingly. Please let me know if that solves the issue on your side too.

# vhost-device-console - Console emulation backend daemon

## Description

This program is a vhost-user backend that emulates a VirtIO Console device.
The device's binary takes as parameters a socket path, a socket number which
is the number of connections, commonly used across all vhost-devices to
communicate with the vhost-user frontend devices, and the backend type
"nested" or "network".

The "nested" backend allows input/output to the guest console through the
current terminal.

The "network" backend creates a local TCP port (specified on vhost-device-console
arguments) and allows input/output to the guest console via that socket.

This program is tested with QEMU's `vhost-user-device-pci` device.
Examples' section below.

## Staging Device
This device will be in `staging` until we complete the following steps:
- [ ] Enable VIRTIO_CONSOLE_F_SIZE feature

> - [ ] Enable VIRTIO_CONSOLE_F_EMERG_WRITE feature

Reviewer 2: What about  `Support` instead of `Enable` ?

Author: Agree, done!

> - [ ] Support VIRTIO_CONSOLE_F_EMERG_WRITE feature

Reviewer 2: I'm fine to keep the device in staging, but if these features are not mandatory in the spec, we can promote it to the main workspace right now.

I don't have a strong opinion, so it is up to you or someone interested on the device to decide when to move it.

Author: Based on the [specs](https://docs.oasis-open.org/virtio/virtio/v1.2/csd01/virtio-v1.2-csd01.html#x1-2960005), I understand that the features: `VIRTIO_CONSOLE_F_SIZE`,
`VIRTIO_CONSOLE_F_MULTIPORT` and `VIRTIO_CONSOLE_F_EMERG_WRITE` are NOT mandatory.
So I also think that we could move this device directly on the main workspace.

Reviewer 2: Maybe one of the reason to keep it in staging is the coverage. Ideally, we would like to avoid decreasing a lot the coverage of the main workspace. So if adding tests it will require some time, maybe we can merge this in staging for now, so you can work on tests in the meantime.

WDYT?

Author: Sounds good to me, fully agree on that!

Reviewer 2: @TimosAmpel cool, so can you add something like "Increase test coverage" in this list?
(I hope it's a last change I ask ;-P)

Author: No worries at all, I have that added in the list and mark the rest of the bullets as "optional".
